Title: Nutrient Competition as a General Mechanism of Regulation in Photosymbiosis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.37826v1

Published Time: Wed, 30 Sep 2026 02:32:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Nutrient Competition as a General Mechanism of Regulation in Photosymbiosis 

# Jordan A. Gault 1,2,3, ∗,¶, Nils R¨ adecker 1,3, †, Iliana B. Baums 1,2,3, ‡,and Thilo Gross 1,2,3, §

> 1

HIFMB, Helmholtz Institute for Functional Marine Biodiversity, Oldenburg, Germany 

> 2

University of Oldenburg, Institute for Chemistry and Biology of the Marine Environment, Oldenburg, Germany 

> 3

Alfred-Wegener Institute, Helmholtz Center for Polar and Marine Research, Bremerhaven, Germany. 

> ∗

Corresponding Author: jordan.gault@uni-oldenburg.de 

> ¶

Im Technologiepark 5, Oldenburg 26129 

> †

nils.raedecker@hifmb.de 

> ‡

iliana.baums@hifmb.de 

> §

thilo2gross@gmail.com 

Abstract 

Nitrogen limitation is a key mechanism regulating the mutualism be-tween photosymbiotic cnidarians and their algal symbionts. Algal-derived photosynthate facilitates host assimilation of inorganic nitrogen, specifi-cally ammonium. The resulting competition between symbiotic partners for inorganic nitrogen leads to a negative feedback loop wherein symbiont density is effectively controlled through facilitation of their competitor. However, it is unclear whether this feedback loop is sufficient to stabi-lize the interaction absent other forms of regulation. Using a generalized modeling approach, we identify the conditions under which cnidarian-algal competition for nitrogen yields dynamically stable symbioses. We show that nitrogen limitation is sufficient to stabilize the interaction through the interplay of intraspecific (symbiont-symbiont) and interspecific (host-symbiont) competition. As host assimilation of inorganic nitrogen in-creases, the system shifts from being stabilized by intraspecific compe-tition between symbionts to interspecific competition between host and symbionts, necessitating a positive coupling of symbiont density to host nitrogen assimilation via photosynthate translocation for dynamic stabil-ity. 

1arXiv:2609.37826v1 [q-bio.PE] 29 Sep 2026 1 Introduction 

Mutualisms initially posed an ecological puzzle: mutually reinforcing positive feedbacks were thought to make the interaction ecologically unstable (Hale & Valdovinos, 2021; Holland, 2015), leading to an “orgy of mutual benefication” (May, 1976). Progress has since been made in understanding how various forms of negative density dependence can stabilize mutualistic interactions over ecolog-ical timescales (Hale & Valdovinos, 2021; Holland, 2015; Massing et al., 2025). Such negative density dependence often invokes, either explicitly or implicitly, limitations that are external to the mutualistic interaction itself (Hale & Val-dovinos, 2021; Johnson & Amarasekare, 2013). However, it has been shown that intraspecific competition for partner resources can stabilize populations in models of two-species interactions (Johnson & Amarasekare, 2013), explicitly linking dynamic stability to competitive interactions among mutualistic part-ners. Competition between and among mutualistic partners may play a central role in their ecological and evolutionary persistence (Jones et al., 2012). Symbioses are a form of mutualism in which partners are in persistent con-tact (Douglas, 2010, 2015). In many symbioses, a larger host maintains an associated population of smaller symbionts (Douglas, 2010, 2015). It has been increasingly recognized that the nature of a given symbiosis can be context de-pendent, potentially shifting from mutualism to parasitism depending on exter-nal and internal factors (Douglas, 2010, 2015). In particular, the biomass ratio of the symbiotic partners can strongly determine the net cost and benefit of the interaction (Becks et al., 2025; Cunning & Baker, 2014). The ecological stabil-ity and persistence of symbioses may thus depend on the population dynamics of symbionts with respect to an individual host. Further, the mutualistic out-come may depend on the mechanisms that regulate population dynamics of the symbionts including intraspecific (symbiont-symbiont) and interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for limiting resources (Becks et al., 2025). However, it is unclear to what degree mechanisms such as intra- and interspecific competition shape mutualistic outcomes within symbioses (Becks et al., 2025). Many species within Cnidaria participate in a nutritional symbiosis, known as photosymbiosis, with dinoflagellates of the family Symbiodiniaceae (Kayal et al., 2018; LaJeunesse et al., 2018). The algal symbionts are hosted intracellu-larly, where they transfer photosynthetically fixed carbon to the host and gain access to limiting nutrients, largely as waste products from host metabolism (Davy et al., 2012; Yellowlees et al., 2008). This symbiosis is especially conspic-uous in scleractinian corals, where symbiont-derived photosynthate fuels host construction of calcium-carbonate skeletons that form the structural foundation of coral reefs (Davy et al., 2012). It has been hypothesized that cnidarians, including scleractinian corals, main-tain a stable population of algal symbionts by restricting the availability of nutrients critical to symbiont growth; specifically inorganic nitrogen in the form of ammonium (Cui et al., 2019; Falkowski et al., 1993; R¨ adecker et al., 22023; Xiang et al., 2020). There is increasing evidence that this is achieved via host-mediated (re-)assimilation of ammonium fueled by symbiont-derived carbon (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2020). Specifi-cally, symbiont-derived photosynthate fuels host amino-acid synthesis via the glutamine synthetase/glutamate synthase (GS–GOGAT) pathway (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2020). By fueling host assimilation of ammonium, symbionts may effectively limit their own density via facilitation of their competitor. The translocation of pho-tosynthate to the host potentially creates a negative feedback loop wherein an increase in symbiont density leads to an increase in host assimilation of am-monium, thereby limiting further symbiont growth (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2023). Symbiont density may thus be regulated by a combination of in-traspecific (symbiont-symbiont) and interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for ammonium. It has been proposed that this simple feedback loop could underlie the re-peated evolution of photosymbiosis across a phylogenetically diverse range of taxa (Cui, Mi, et al., 2023). However, the sufficiency and dynamical conse-quences of this mechanism have not been well characterized. While some models have highlighted the importance of nitrogen limitation to the dynamic stability of the interaction (Cunning et al., 2017; Muller et al., 2009), they included other limiting mechanisms, potentially obscuring the role of host-mediated ammonium assimilation. Here, we ask if host-symbiont competition for ammonium is sufficient to yield dynamically stable symbiosis and, if so, whether the stabilizing mechanisms de-pend on the relative dominance of intra- versus interspecific competition. We consider a simple model of symbiont population regulation driven by a com-bination of intraspecific (symbiont-symbiont) and interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for ammonium (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2021, 2023). To characterize the dynamical stability of the model, we take the approach of gen-eralized modeling (Gross & Feudel, 2006; Massing & Gross, 2022; Yeakel et al., 2011). Using generalized modeling, it is possible to characterize the local stabil-ity of steady states without specifying explicit functional forms for the processes within the model. This allows us to elucidate the key stabilizing feedback loops based only on the architecture of the interaction. We find that host-symbiont competition is not only sufficient to stabilize the interaction, but leads to a tran-sition in the system wherein dynamic stability requires symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation via the translocation of photosynthate. 32 Methods 

# 2.1 A generalized model of host-symbiont nutrient com-petition 

We consider the following simple model of coral-algal nutrient competition di-agrammed in Figure 1. Dissolved inorganic nitrogen in the form of ammonium (hereafter nitrogen) enters the system where it is either assimilated by the host or used by the symbionts for growth and reproduction. The symbionts con-stantly produce photosynthate, of which any excess is translocated to the host. The translocated photosynthate is then used by the host to facilitate nitrogen assimilation. 

Figure 1: Diagram of the model of host-symbiont nitrogen competition. Bold letters represent state variables while uppercase letters represent process func-tions. Nitrogen (N) enters the host where it is either assimilated (A) by the host or taken up (R) by the symbionts (S) for growth and reproduction. Pho-tosynthate (P) is produced and translocated (C) by the symbionts where it is used (H) by the host to facilitate nitrogen assimilation. We can write the model as ˙N = U (N ) − A(N, P ) − R(N, S ) (1) ˙S = G(S, N ) − L(S) (2) ˙P = C(S, N ) − H(N, P ), (3) where N is the intracellular concentration of nitrogen, S is the symbiont pop-ulation density, and P is the intracellular concentration of photosynthate. The dot above each variable denotes their derivative with respect to time. Nitrogen enters the system through an uptake function U and is either assimilated by the host A or utilized R by the symbionts for growth and reproduction. Symbiont population density increases due to symbiont reproduction G and decreases due to symbiont loss L (which could represent expulsion from the host). Photo-synthate is translocated C by the symbionts and then used H by the host to facilitate nitrogen assimilation. 4Because the model focuses on the short-term dynamic regulation of the sym-biont population in a healthy symbiotic state, we omit and/or condense some processes. First, we do not consider host growth as a dynamic variable. We instead assume the host has reached a steady state size at which point nitrogen assimilation fuels maintenance and metabolic turnover. Second, we omit nitro-gen recycling as a dynamic input of nitrogen into the system. Host-assimilated nitrogen enters a slow-turnover pool where it is recycled back into the system on the order of months via host catabolism of metabolic products (Tanaka et al., 2018). However, in the healthy symbiotic state, the net flux of nitrogen into this pool is expected to be positive, representing a state of net positive host anabolism (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2021). While sustained carbon limitation can induce a shift to net host catabolism (R¨ adecker et al., 2021), the host can likely buffer short-term decreases in labile carbon to maintain a state of net anabolism in the healthy symbiotic state (R¨ adecker et al., 2018). We therefore expect the input of nitrogen via host catabolism to be weakly coupled to short-term fluctuations in labile carbon on the timescales considered here. Now that we have specified the structure of the model—the state variables, the processes by which they change, and their relationship to one another—we can proceed to analyze the model to gain insights about the stability of the system. 

# 2.2 Model normalization and calculation of the Jacobian 

If we were to take the typical dynamical modeling approach, the next step would be to define the specific functional forms of the processes and choose biologically reasonable values for any parameters they might contain. We would then solve for the values of N = N ∗, S = S∗, and P = P ∗ that yield steady states where the rate of change in all state variables ˙N = ˙S = ˙P = 0. Finally, we would calculate the Jacobian to evaluate the local stability of the steady states. Here we take the approach of generalized modeling to characterize the sta-bility of the system (Gross & Feudel, 2006; Massing & Gross, 2022; Yeakel et al., 2011). Using generalized modeling, we do not specify functional forms for the processes. Rather, we formally normalize the model with respect to un-known, positive steady states. Normalizing the system in this manner allows us to parameterize the Jacobian in terms of normalized rates and elasticities (i.e. logarithmic derivatives of the unspecified process functions in the steady state). Elasticities capture the non-linearity in the response of each process to a small perturbation in the steady state. Because elasticities can be defined without reference to a specific functional form, we can characterize the local stability of any system that conforms to the structure in Eqs. (1)–(3). To normalize the model, we begin by defining for each variable Xx = XX∗ (4) 5and for each process function F (X)

f (x) = F (X)

F ∗ = F (xX ∗)

F ∗ (5) where X∗ denotes the value of X in the steady state and F ∗ = F (X∗) denotes the process function evaluated in the steady state. Normalizing the model in Eqs. (1)–(3) with respect to the steady states [N ∗, S ∗, P ∗] yields ˙n = U ∗

N ∗ u(n) − A∗

N ∗ a(n, p ) − R∗

N ∗ r(n, s ) (6) ˙s = G∗

S∗ g(s, n ) − L∗

S∗ l(s) (7) ˙p = C∗

P ∗ c(s, n ) − H∗

P ∗ h(n, p ) (8) where lowercase letters denote normalized process functions and state vari-ables. The benefit of normalizing the model in this fashion is that even though we did not specify functional forms for any of the processes, we now know the location of the steady states in the normalized system. Because each normalized state variable is defined as x = X/X ∗, the steady state value of each variable 

x∗ = X∗/X ∗ equals 1. Additionally, because f (x∗) = F ∗/F ∗, all normalized process functions equal 1 in the steady state. The prefactors of the normalized process functions in Eqs. (6)–(8) denote the per-capita (or per-unit) rate of each process in the steady state. Because the rate of gain and loss must balance in the steady state, we can define the following scale parameters that represent the turnover rate for each state variable 

αn = U ∗

N ∗ = A∗

N ∗ + R∗

N ∗ (9) 

αs = G∗

S∗ = L∗

S∗ (10) 

αp = C∗

P ∗ = H∗

P ∗ . (11) Nitrogen is lost through two different processes (Eq. 9); assimilation by the host ( A) and assimilation by the symbionts ( R). We define the branching pa-rameters β and its complement ¯β = 1 − β, which represent the proportion of nitrogen lost through each process in the steady state 6β = 1

αn

A∗

N ∗ = A∗

A∗ + R∗ (12) ¯β = 1

αn

R∗

N ∗ = R∗

A∗ + R∗ . (13) The branching parameter β represents the relative dominance of intraspe-cific (symbiont-symbiont) versus interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for nitrogen. At low values of β, the symbionts assimilate the majority of internal nitrogen in which case symbiont-symbiont competition for nitrogen is dominant. Increasing the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β, represents an increase in host-symbiont competition for internal nitrogen. Substituting the scale and branching parameters into Eqs. (6)–(8) allows us to write the final generalized model as ˙n = αn(u(n) − βa (n, p ) − ¯βr (n, s )) (14) ˙s = αs(g(s, n ) − l(s)) (15) ˙p = αp(c(s, n ) − h(n, p )) . (16) Now that we have defined the generalized model, we can analyze the stability of the steady states in the normalized system. We begin by calculating the Jacobian matrix 

J =



αn(un − βa n − ¯βr n) −αn ¯βr s −αnβa p

αsgn αs(gs − ls) 0

αp(cn − hn) αpcs −αphp

 (17) where each entry Jij is the derivative of the i-th differential equation with respect to the j-th variable in the steady state 

Jij = ∂ ˙xi

∂x j ∗

. (18) Each entry of the Jacobian describes how the time derivative of each state variable reacts to a given perturbation. For example, the entry J11 captures the magnitude and direction of the rate of change of ˙ n following a small perturbation to the amount of nitrogen in the system in the steady state. The value of a given entry in the Jacobian depends upon the response of each of the relevant process functions to a small perturbation in the steady state. For example, in entry J11 , the parameters un, an, and rn capture the magnitude 7and direction of the response of the process functions u(n), a(n), and r(n) to a small change in nitrogen. Such parameters are known as elasticities. Elasticities are defined as logarithmic derivatives of the non-normalized pro-cess functions evaluated in the steady state. For a process function F (X), the elasticity fx is defined as 

fx = ∂ ln F (X)

∂ ln X ∗

. (19) Elasticities capture the degree of non-linearity in the response of a process function to a given perturbation in the steady state. Because we did not specify the process functions, the elasticities are treated as unknown parameters of the system. The elasticities can be related in a simple and convenient way to the poten-tial functional forms of the processes. For example, if the uptake process is a quadratic function of nitrogen such that U (N ) = bN 2, then normalization will yield un = 2. Similarly, if the uptake function is an inverse function of nitrogen such that U (N ) = b/N , then normalization will yield un = −1. In general, for any power law F (X) = bX k, normalization will yield fx = k.The steady states of a dynamical system are locally stable if the real parts of all eigenvalues of its Jacobian are negative. We can therefore evaluate the sta-bility of the symbiotic interaction by calculating the eigenvalues of the Jacobian. Because the parameters of the Jacobian represent biologically interpretable pro-cesses, we can now characterize how these processes affect the stability of the symbiosis. 

# 2.3 Numerical stability analysis 

To explore how the processes in our model affect stability across a range of biologically plausible functional responses, we used an ensemble approach as described in Massing and Gross (2022) and Yeakel et al. (2011). For each parameter, we generated M = 10 7 random samples from a uniform distribution with ranges specified in Table 1. For each of the M parameter sets, we populated the Jacobian and calculated its eigenvalues. We defined 

sm =

(

1, Re( λ0) < 00, otherwise (20) such that sm equals 1 if the m-th parameter set is stable (i.e. if the real part of the Jacobian’s leading eigenvalue is negative) and equals 0 otherwise. Because the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β, represents the relative dominance of symbiont-symbiont versus host-symbiont competition for internal nitrogen, shifts in β may result in concomitant shifts in the identity of 8stabilizing processes. To explore the relationship between host assimilation and stability, we treated the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β, as the organizing axis for the subsequent correlation analysis. By considering stability as a function of β, we can understand how the relative dominance of intraspe-cific (symbiont-symbiont) versus interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for nitrogen affects the stability of the interaction. We binned the M parameter sets into B = 20 bins based on their sampled values of β. Bins were of equal width 0 .05. Within each bin, we calculated the Pearson correlation between the m-th realization of each parameter (excluding 

β) and the stability of the m-th parameter set sm. Large positive values of the Pearson correlation indicate that larger values of the parameter are stabilizing while large negative values of the Pearson correlation indicate that smaller values of the parameter are stabilizing. 

# 2.4 Bifurcation analysis 

To understand in more detail how individual processes affect the stability of the system, we analytically searched for bifurcation points in the parameter space. A bifurcation is a qualitative change in the long-term dynamics of the system, such as a loss of stability or a change in the number or types of long-term behavior. Bifurcations of steady states typically occur in two ways: fold (saddle-node) bifurcations and Hopf bifurcations (Guckenheimer & Holmes, 2013). Fold bi-furcations represent the destruction of steady states and can represent runaway growth or the collapse of interactions (Massing et al., 2025). Hopf bifurcations indicate the onset of oscillations which can represent runaway oscillatory be-havior or the onset of stable limit cycles (Massing & Gross, 2022; Yeakel et al., 2011). Fold bifurcations occur when a single, real eigenvalue crosses the imaginary axis to become positive; i.e. when the Jacobian has a zero eigenvalue (Gucken-heimer & Holmes, 2013). Because the determinant of a matrix is the product of its eigenvalues, we set the determinant of the Jacobian equal to 0 as a test function for fold bifurcations (Massing & Gross, 2022; Stiefs et al., 2008). Hopf bifurcations occur when a complex-conjugate pair of eigenvalues simul-taneously cross the imaginary axis such that the real parts become positive (Guckenheimer & Holmes, 2013). We used the method of resultants (Gross & Feudel, 2004; Guckenheimer et al., 1997) to derive a test function for Hopf bifurcations. We solved the test functions for fold and Hopf bifurcations symbolically to plot bifurcation points for a subset of parameters identified as important by the numerical stability analysis. To understand the relationship between stability and the relative dominance of intraspecific (symbiont-symbiont) versus interspe-cific (host-symbiont) competition, we generated bifurcation points for each focal 9parameter as a function of the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β.Non-focal parameters were fixed to biologically plausible values representing a healthy symbiotic state as listed in Table 1. We restricted ourselves to the case where symbiont density-dependent growth is stronger than density-dependent loss ( gs > l s) in the steady state, which allows us to understand the stability of the system when nitrogen limitation is the only mechanism available to control symbiont population density. 10 Table 1: Parameters of the Jacobian, their range of values for the numerical stability analysis, their fixed values for the bifurcation analysis, their definition, and their fixed-value interpretation. The symbol δX denotes a small, positive perturbation in variable X in the steady state. 

Parameter Range Value Definition Value Interpretation 

αn [1,10] 10 Nitrogen turnover rate Fast relative to symbiont turnover 

β [0,1] [0,1] Proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host Dominance of intra- vs interspecific competition 

un [-2,2] -0.5 Response of nitrogen uptake to δN

Decreases sub-linearly (moderately regulated) 

an [0,2] 1 Response of host nitrogen assimilation to 

δN

Increases linearly 

ap [0,2] 1 Response of host nitrogen assimilation to 

δP

Increases linearly 

rn [0,2] 1 Response of symbiont nitrogen assimilation to 

δN

Increases linearly 

rs [0,2] 1 Response of symbiont nitrogen assimilation to 

δS

Increases linearly 

αs [1,10] 1 Symbiont turnover rate Slow relative to N and P turnover 

gs [0,2] 1 Response of symbiont growth to δS

Increases linearly 

ls [0,2] 0.2 Response of symbiont loss to δS

Increases sub-linearly (saturated expulsion) 

gn [0,2] 1.5 Response of symbiont growth to δN

Increases super-linearly (symbionts are nitrogen limited) 

αp [1,10] 10 Photosynthate turnover rate Fast relative to symbiont turnover 

cs [-2,2] 1 Response of photosynthate translocation to δS

Increases linearly 

cn [-2,0] -1 Response of photosynthate translocation to δN

Decreases linearly 

hn [0,2] 1 Response of host photosynthate use to δN

Increases linearly 

hp [0,2] 2 Response of host photosynthate use to δP

Increases quadratically (multiple metabolic sinks) 

11 3 Results 

# 3.1 Nitrogen limitation is necessary for dynamic stability. 

Figure 2: Correlation of rate and elasticity parameters with stability. Corre-lations are binned by proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β. Posi-tive correlations indicate that higher values of the parameter promote stability while negative correlations indicate that lower values of the parameter promote stability. Note that for parameters restricted to a positive range, a negative correlation indicates that a weaker positive response is stabilizing relative to a stronger positive response. Ranges for all parameters are listed in Table 1. The numerical stability analysis identified three processes that are impor-tant in stabilizing the system across the entire range of proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host β (Fig. 2): 1. Nitrogen uptake with respect to a change in internal nitrogen availability (un). 2. Symbiont growth with respect to a change in symbiont density ( gs). 3. Symbiont loss with respect to a change in symbiont density ( ls). The strongly negative correlation of un with stability indicates that given a small increase in internal nitrogen availability, a decrease in the uptake of 12 external nitrogen promotes stability. The parameter un shows a strong correla-tion with stability across the entire range of proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, indicating that nitrogen limitation is key to stabilizing the system whether symbiont-symbiont or host-symbiont competition is dominant. The negative correlation of gs and the positive correlation of ls with stability indicate that given a small increase in symbiont density, a stronger response in symbiont loss relative to symbiont growth promotes stability. In other words, it is stabilizing if symbiont growth is limited by an additional factor independent of nitrogen availability (e.g. space limitation within the host or an increase in symbiont expulsion by the host). In the bifurcation analysis below, we consider stability when nitrogen limitation is the only factor limiting symbiont growth (i.e. when gs > l s). 

# 3.2 Symbiont growth and subsequent nitrogen consump-tion promote stability when interspecific competition is weak. 

The numerical stability analysis also identified processes that are important in stabilizing the system depending on the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host, β.When the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host is low ( β < 0.5), the following processes related to symbiont growth and nitrogen uptake are relatively important in stabilizing the system (Fig. 2): 1. Symbiont growth with respect to a change in internal nitrogen availability (gn). 2. Symbiont nitrogen uptake with respect to a change in internal nitrogen availability ( rn). 3. Symbiont nitrogen uptake with respect to a change in symbiont density (rs). The positive correlation of gn and rn with stability indicates that given an increase in nitrogen, an increase in both symbiont growth and symbiont assimi-lation of nitrogen promotes stability. The positive correlation of rs with stability indicates that given an increase in symbiont density, an increase in symbiont nitrogen uptake promotes stability. Taken together, these results suggest that when interspecific competition is weak, stability is maintained by nitrogen lim-itation achieved through a combination of symbiont growth and subsequent symbiont use of nitrogen. 13 3.3 Symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation pro-motes stability when interspecific competition is strong. 

As the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host increases, the following processes related to host assimilation of nitrogen and symbiont translocation of photosynthate become increasingly important in stabilizing the system (Fig. 2): 1. Host nitrogen assimilation with respect to a change in internal nitrogen availability ( an). 2. Host nitrogen assimilation with respect to a change in photosynthate avail-ability ( ap). 3. Translocation of photosynthate with respect to a change in symbiont den-sity ( cs). 4. Host photosynthate use with respect to a change in photosynthate avail-ability ( hp). The positive correlation of an with stability indicates that given an increase in nitrogen, an increase in host assimilation of nitrogen promotes stability. The negative correlation of ap with stability indicates that given an increase in pho-tosynthate, a weaker increase in host assimilation of nitrogen promotes stability (ap is restricted to a range of positive values so a negative correlation indicates that a weaker positive response is stabilizing). The positive correlation of cs indicates that given an increase in symbiont den-sity, an increase in translocation of photosynthate promotes stability. Finally, the positive correlation of hp with stability indicates that given an increase in photosynthate, an increase in host use of photosynthate promotes stabil-ity. This likely indicates that a buildup of photosynthate through inefficient host use can destabilize the system by decoupling host assimilation from sym-biont density—a hypothesis we further explore in the bifurcation analysis below. Taken together, these results suggest that as interspecific competition increases, stability is maintained by symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation via the translocation of photosynthate. 14 3.4 Nitrogen limitation is sufficient for dynamic stability when symbiont density is not self-limiting. 

Figure 3: Bifurcation plots for processes related to nitrogen uptake, symbiont growth and symbiont assimilation of nitrogen. Orange lines denote Hopf bifur-cations, purple lines denote fold bifurcations, and gray shading denotes region of stability. (a) Given an increase in internal nitrogen availability, a sub-linear decrease in nitrogen uptake promotes stability across the entire range of β. (b) Super-linear symbiont growth with respect to nitrogen and (c) nearly linear ni-trogen use with respect to symbiont density are necessary to maintain stability. (d) Symbiont nitrogen assimilation with respect to a change in nitrogen does not strongly affect stability, likely due to increased assimilation driven by strong symbiont growth. While the numerical stability analysis is an efficient way to identify the nature and identity of processes that are important in stabilizing the system, the bi-furcation analysis provides a more detailed understanding of how and where stability is lost in the parameter space with respect to individual processes. Additionally, by restricting ourselves to the case where symbiont growth is not directly limited by their own density ( ls < g s; Table 1), we can explore how the system is stabilized when nitrogen limitation is the only potential regula-tory mechanism. Under this restriction, we find that the interaction can still be 15 dynamically stable. A combination of limited nitrogen uptake by the host and strong growth and subsequent nitrogen use by the symbionts promotes stability through nitrogen limitation (Fig. 3). The bifurcation diagram for un (Fig. 3a) shows that given an increase in inter-nally available nitrogen in the steady state, the uptake of nitrogen must respond, at most, sub-linearly to avoid crossing a Hopf bifurcation for β < 0.85. This suggests that if the system responds to an increase in nitrogen by a sufficiently strong increase in uptake, stability is lost through oscillations, likely driven by overshoot and subsequent crashes of the symbiont population in response to the initial strong increase and subsequent depletion of nitrogen. Stability is pos-sible across the entire range of β when uptake decreases sub-linearly given an increase in internally available nitrogen, indicating that moderately regulated uptake promotes stability. The bifurcation diagram for gn (Fig. 3b) shows that given an increase in nitrogen in the steady state, symbiont growth must respond strongly (super-linearly) for β < 0.65 to avoid crossing a fold bifurcation. Additionally, the bifurcation diagram for rs (Fig. 3c) indicates that given an increase in symbiont density, symbiont nitrogen use should increase at least nearly linearly for most of the range of β to avoid crossing a fold bifurcation. Taken together, this indi-cates that strong symbiont growth and subsequent nitrogen use are necessary to avoid system collapse, especially when the host assimilates less than 65% of the nitrogen. Additionally, a super-linear response in symbiont growth with respect to nitrogen suggests that the population is well below its growth potential with respect to nitrogen, indicating that a nitrogen-limited symbiont population is necessary for stability. Finally, the bifurcation diagram for rn (Fig. 3d) shows that given an increase in nitrogen, symbiont use of nitrogen can take on a relatively large range of responses (including an elasticity of 0). While seemingly counterintuitive, this suggests that as long as nitrogen uptake responds sufficiently negatively ( un =

−0.5; Table 1), and symbiont growth responds sufficiently positively ( gn = 1.5; Table 1), nitrogen limitation is maintained by an increase in symbionts ( rs = 1, Table 1), rendering rn less critical for dynamic stability. 16 3.5 Symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation be-comes necessary for dynamic stability as interspecific competition increases. 

Figure 4: Bifurcation plots for processes associated with host nitrogen assimila-tion, host use of photosynthate, and symbiont translocation of photosynthate. Orange lines denote Hopf bifurcations, purple lines denote fold bifurcations, and gray shading denotes region of stability. (a) Host assimilation of nitrogen must respond positively to an increase in photosynthate when interspecific competi-tion is sufficiently strong ( β > 0.2). (b) Host use of photosynthate must respond positively to an increase in photosynthate availability. (c) Translocation of pho-tosynthate must respond positively to an increase in symbiont density when interspecific competition is sufficiently strong ( β > 0.43). (d) Translocation of photosynthate must respond negatively to an increase in nitrogen when inter-specific competition is high ( β > 0.85). The bifurcation analysis also identifies a transition where dynamic stability re-quires symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation. As interspecific (host-symbiont) competition for nitrogen increases, host assimilation of nitrogen must be coupled to changes in symbiont density via the translocation of photosyn-thate for the interaction to be dynamically stable (Fig. 4). The bifurcation diagram for ap (Fig. 4a) shows that given an increase in pho-17 tosynthate, the response of host nitrogen assimilation does not affect dynamic stability for β < 0.2. However, when β = 0 .2, the fold bifurcation crosses 0, indicating that host assimilation must respond positively to an increase in pho-tosynthate for the system to be stable. This transition marks the point at which host assimilation of nitrogen must be coupled to the translocation of photosyn-thate to maintain stability. When the host assimilates the majority of internally available nitrogen ( β > 0.5), a super-linear increase in assimilation risks loss of stability by crossing a Hopf bifurcation, which may represent oscillations driven by rapid depletion of available photosynthate followed by decreased assimilation and a consequent increase in nitrogen available for symbiont growth. The bifurcation diagram for hp (Fig. 4b) shows that given an increase in pho-tosynthate, host use of photosynthate must respond positively to avoid crossing a Hopf bifurcation. Inefficient host use of photosynthate may cause it to accu-mulate, leading to oscillations as available photosynthate becomes increasingly decoupled from the current symbiont population density. The bifurcation diagram for cs (Fig. 4c) shows that given an increase in symbiont density, the response of translocation does not affect dynamic stability when β is sufficiently low ( β < 0.1). However, when the host assimilates a sufficient proportion of nitrogen ( β ≈ 0.43), translocation of photosynthate must respond positively to an increase in symbiont population density to avoid crossing a fold bifurcation. Crossing the fold bifurcation may represent runaway symbiont growth as an increase in population density does not yield enough photosynthate to limit nitrogen availability via host assimilation. Finally, the bifurcation diagram for cn (Fig. 4d) shows that given an increase in nitrogen, symbiont translocation should decrease to avoid crossing a fold bifurcation when β is sufficiently high ( β ≈ 0.85). This may indicate that, given an increase in nitrogen, a positive response in translocation could lead to runaway nitrogen depletion by the host. 

# 4 Discussion 

Symbioses represent a balancing act between the costs and benefits of maintain-ing an associated population of symbionts (Becks et al., 2025; Cunning & Baker, 2014; Douglas, 2010). Because symbiont density determines the net benefit of the interaction, the ecological stability of symbiosis depends on the mechanisms by which the symbiont population is regulated (Becks et al., 2025; Cunning & Baker, 2014). The nature of these regulatory mechanisms likely depends on the type of symbiosis and resources exchanged. In plant-mycorrhizal interac-tions, previous work has highlighted the importance of active host sanctions to differentially punish and facilitate symbionts based on their degree of cooper-ation (Douglas, 2010). In cnidarian-algal photosymbiosis, symbiont density is potentially regulated through a passive feedback loop wherein cooperation is enforced via host-symbiont competition for a single limiting resource (Cui, Mi, 18 et al., 2023; Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2023; Xiang et al., 2020). Here, we show that host-symbiont competition for inorganic nitrogen in the form of ammonium is sufficient to yield dynamically stable symbiosis. Moreover, nitrogen limitation is sufficient to stabilize symbiont density absent any other form of density dependence. Most importantly, we find that the identity of the processes that stabilize the interaction depends on the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host. When the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host is low, stability is maintained via symbiont growth and subsequent nitrogen use. As the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host increases, stability increasingly requires that symbiont density is coupled to host assimilation of nitrogen via the translocation of photosynthate. When the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host is sufficiently low, both numerical stability (Fig. 2) and bifurcation analyses (Fig. 3) indicate that intraspecific (symbiont-symbiont) competition for nitrogen is sufficient to sta-bilize the interaction. In the steady state, local stability is maintained through strong symbiont growth given an increase in nitrogen and strong nitrogen use given an increase in symbiont density. Symbiont growth is limited largely by cell-cycle arrest, with up to 90% of symbionts arrested in G1 phase, consistent with strong nutrient limitation (Gorman et al., 2025). Additionally, experimental addition of ammonium leads to rapid assimilation by symbionts (Pernice et al., 2012) and increases in symbiont density (R¨ adecker et al., 2023). Taken together, experimental evidence (Gorman et al., 2025; Pernice et al., 2012; R¨ adecker et al., 2023) and the results of this study suggest that nitrogen limitation is enforced through strong symbiont growth and subsequent nitrogen use. As the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host increases, we find that dynamic stability increasingly requires that symbionts facilitate host assimila-tion of nitrogen through the translocation of photosynthate. When the propor-tion of nitrogen assimilated by the host is sufficiently high, host assimilation of nitrogen must be positively coupled to the translocation of photosynthate (Fig. 4a). Additionally, symbiont density must be positively coupled to translo-cation of photosynthate (Fig. 4c). These positive couplings indicate that high interspecific competition for internal nitrogen is maintained by symbiont facil-itation of host nitrogen assimilation. The coupling between translocation of photosynthate and interspecific competition for nitrogen was demonstrated ex-perimentally in Aiptasia by observing that the addition of labile carbon increases host assimilation of nitrogen and decreases symbiont density (Cui et al., 2019; R¨ adecker et al., 2023). Notably, the results of the bifurcation analysis indicate that symbiont facilitation of interspecific competition is necessary for stability when the host assimilates ≈ 40% of the available nitrogen (Fig. 4a and Fig. 4c), consistent with empirical estimates of host assimilation (Cui, Konciute, et al., 2023) in Aiptasia .Regardless of whether intra- or interspecific competition dominates, we find that stability depends upon how host uptake of external nitrogen responds to changes in the concentration of internal nitrogen. If there is an increase in the 19 concentration of internal nitrogen, a sufficiently strong increase in host uptake of external nitrogen can destabilize the system (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3a). When in-terspecific competition is low, the system can tolerate a weak increase in host uptake of external nitrogen in response to an increase in internal nitrogen, sug-gesting that strong symbiont growth and subsequent nitrogen depletion may be sufficient to maintain stability. However, as interspecific competition increases, host uptake of external nitrogen must be increasingly regulated to avoid instabil-ity, suggesting that an uncontrolled influx of external nitrogen can overwhelm the host’s ability to limit internal nitrogen through assimilation. Consistent with this interpretation, eutrophication has been shown to interfere with nutri-ent cycling and increase susceptibility to environmental stress in scleractinian corals (R¨ adecker et al., 2021). Taken together, intra- and interspecific competition for nitrogen are sufficient to stabilize the interaction. In fact, when the proportion of internal nitrogen assimilated by the host is low, our results suggest that intraspecific competition alone for nitrogen is sufficient to regulate symbiont population density. Pre-vious studies have demonstrated that intraspecific competition for mutualistic benefits can stabilize populations in two-species models of mutualism (Johnson & Amarasekare, 2013). This begs the question: why, and when, is interspecific competition necessary to stabilize the interaction? It is important to note that, while the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host ( β) is a static parameter in the generalized model, it is a dynamic variable in the real interaction. In reality, low values of β (i.e. weak interspe-cific competition) are expected to be a transient feature of the interaction (Cui, Mi, et al., 2023; R¨ adecker et al., 2023). Consider that in a nitrogen-replete intracellular environment, symbionts will invest most photosynthetically fixed carbon into fueling their own growth, with correspondingly little photosynthate translocated to the host. Consequently, the host will have limited capacity to as-similate intracellular nitrogen. However, as the symbiont population increases, intracellular nitrogen will become increasingly limited for the symbionts. Sym-biont population growth will therefore decrease with a concomitant increase in translocated photosynthate to the host. Host assimilation of intracellular ni-trogen will consequently increase, further limiting nitrogen availability for the symbionts. Thus, intraspecific competition between symbionts for intracellular nitrogen will naturally drive a transition to increased interspecific competition via increased translocation of photosynthate. Considering the dynamic nature of β, the bifurcation diagrams are best viewed as maps that show how the identity and nature of stabilizing processes depend on the proportion of nitrogen assimilated by the host. We can therefore imagine the system moving naturally along the β axis as increased translocation of photosynthate facilitates increased interspecific competition for nitrogen. The bifurcation diagrams thus demonstrate that the natural transition from intra-to interspecific competition necessitates the emergence of a positive coupling of symbiont density to host nitrogen assimilation via photosynthate translocation 20 for dynamic stability (Fig. 4a and Fig. 4c). The dynamic transition from intra- to interspecific competition and the con-cordant necessity for a positive coupling of symbiont density to host nitrogen assimilation via photosynthate translocation hint at a connection between the ecological stability and evolutionary onset of the symbiosis. Because this posi-tive coupling does not require the evolution of novel mechanisms to regulate the symbiosis, it has been proposed that it may underlie the repeated evolution of photosymbiosis across a phylogenetically diverse range of organisms (Cui, Mi, et al., 2023). Additionally, by-product interactions are thought to be an impor-tant stepping-stone in the evolutionary origin of some symbioses (Douglas, 2010, 2015). In the cnidarian-algal symbiosis, host waste-ammonia may have served as the initial by-product resource that facilitated the onset of the interaction (Douglas, 2015). After initial infection and rapid growth of the algal symbionts, nitrogen limitation would result in increased translocation of unused photosyn-thate to the host, driving increased interspecific competition via a transition to symbiont facilitation of host nitrogen assimilation. While our results demonstrate that host-symbiont competition for nitrogen is sufficient to stabilize the interaction, this does not mean that other forms of negative feedback or host regulation are absent or unimportant. Other limit-ing resources, such as phosphorus and inorganic carbon, are likely important in driving symbiont dynamics (Cunning et al., 2017; Muller et al., 2009). Addi-tionally, other mechanisms of regulation such as expulsion of symbionts by the host may be important depending on the stage of the algal infection and on environmental conditions (Dimond & Carrington, 2008; Gorman et al., 2025). However, mechanisms such as host expulsion may represent a more costly al-ternative to nitrogen limitation through host assimilation. In this sense, inter-specific competition for nitrogen may represent the most cost-efficient way to maintain symbiont density under healthy conditions. It is also important to note that our model does not consider coral bleaching; i.e. the mass expulsion of symbionts by the host. In the context of our model, loss of stability represents the breakdown of nutrient cycling and subsequent loss of control of symbiont density. However, it has been shown that a breakdown of nutrient cycling may precede bleaching (R¨ adecker et al., 2021). Thus, the loss of stability in our model could represent the initial loss of control of symbiont density preceding the more drastic and energetically costly mechanism of mass expulsion by the host. While the generalized model identifies the processes that are important in sta-bilizing the interaction, due to the normalization procedure, it cannot explicitly quantify changes in steady state values of the state variables nor simulate dy-namic trajectories or outcomes. However, our results offer a starting point from which more fully specified models can be derived within the constraints iden-tified here for dynamic stability. In fact, the lack of specific functional forms can be seen as a strength of the present approach. Photosymbiotic organisms are phylogenetically diverse and the particular functional relationships between 21 different processes may be varied as well. By focusing on the qualitative re-action of the various processes, we have identified the core processes necessary to stabilize the interaction regardless of specific functional form. Additionally, the stabilizing processes identified here can serve as the foundation upon which more taxon-specific layers of complexity can be built. A central challenge in the study of symbioses, and mutualisms in general, has been to understand how system-specific details and general ecological mecha-nisms interact to shape their ecological and evolutionary persistence (Bronstein, 2015; Douglas, 2010, 2015; Sachs & Simms, 2006). When seen as a consumer-resource interaction, the factors that stabilize symbioses are largely similar to the factors that stabilize more familiar competitive and consumer interactions (Holland, 2015; Johnson & Amarasekare, 2013; Jones et al., 2012). Here, we demonstrate how a combination of intra- and interspecific competition for a single resource is sufficient to stabilize cnidarian-algal photosymbiosis. Most importantly, we show that increased interspecific competition requires the emer-gence of a positive coupling of symbiont density to host nitrogen assimilation via photosynthate translocation for dynamic stability. This transition arises naturally from the dynamics of the interaction, reinforcing the possibility that this simple mechanism underlies the repeated independent evolution of pho-tosymbiosis (Cui, Mi, et al., 2023). It is tempting to speculate that similar mechanisms may underlie the evolutionary onset and ecological persistence of other symbioses, and a future challenge will be to identify the extent to which symbiotic interactions are mediated by such simple ecological feedbacks. 22 References 

Becks, L., Gaedke, U., & Klauschies, T. (2025). Emergent feedback between symbiosis form and population dynamics. Trends in Ecology & Evolu-tion , 40 (5), 449–459. Bronstein, J. L. (2015). The study of mutualism. Mutualism , 3–19. Cui, G., Konciute, M. K., Ling, L., Esau, L., Raina, J.-B., Han, B., Salazar, O. R., Presnell, J. S., R¨ adecker, N., Zhong, H., Menzies, J., Cleves, P. A., Liew, Y. J., Krediet, C. J., Sawiccy, V., Cziesielski, M. J., Guagliardo, P., Bougoure, J., Pernice, M., . . . Aranda, M. (2023). Molecular insights into the darwin paradox of coral reefs from the sea anemone aiptasia. 

Science Advances , 9 (11), eadf7108. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv. adf7108 Cui, G., Liew, Y. J., Li, Y., Kharbatia, N., Zahran, N. I., Emwas, A.-H., Eguiluz, V. M., & Aranda, M. (2019). Host-dependent nitrogen recycling as a mechanism of symbiont control in aiptasia. PLoS genetics , 15 (6), e1008189. Cui, G., Mi, J., Moret, A., Menzies, J., Zhong, H., Li, A., Hung, S.-H., Al-Babili, S., & Aranda, M. (2023). A carbon-nitrogen negative feedback loop un-derlies the repeated evolution of cnidarian–symbiodiniaceae symbioses. 

Nature Communications , 14 (1), 6949. Cunning, R., & Baker, A. C. (2014). Not just who, but how many: The im-portance of partner abundance in reef coral symbioses. Frontiers in microbiology , 5, 400. Cunning, R., Muller, E. B., Gates, R. D., & Nisbet, R. M. (2017). A dynamic bioenergetic model for coral-symbiodinium symbioses and coral bleach-ing as an alternate stable state. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 431 ,49–62. Davy, S. K., Allemand, D., & Weis, V. M. (2012). Cell biology of cnidarian-dinoflagellate symbiosis. Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews ,

76 (2), 229–261. Dimond, J., & Carrington, E. (2008). Symbiosis regulation in a facultatively symbiotic temperate coral: Zooxanthellae division and expulsion. Coral Reefs , 27 (3), 601–604. Douglas, A. E. (2010). The symbiotic habit . Princeton University Press. Douglas, A. E. (2015). The special case of symbioses: Mutualisms with persistent contact. Mutualism , 20–34. Falkowski, P. G., Dubinsky, Z., Muscatine, L., & McCloskey, L. (1993). Popu-lation control in symbiotic corals. Bioscience , 43 (9), 606–611. Gorman, L. M., Tivey, T. R., Raymond, E. H., Ashley, I. A., Oakley, C. A., Grossman, A. R., Weis, V. M., & Davy, S. K. (2025). Stability of the cnidarian–dinoflagellate symbiosis is primarily determined by sym-biont cell-cycle arrest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences ,

122 (14), e2412396122. Gross, T., & Feudel, U. (2004). Analytical search for bifurcation surfaces in parameter space. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena , 195 (3-4), 292–302. 23 Gross, T., & Feudel, U. (2006). Generalized models as a universal approach to the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems. Physical Review E—Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics , 73 (1), 016205. Guckenheimer, J., & Holmes, P. (2013). Nonlinear oscillations, dynamical sys-tems, and bifurcations of vector fields . Springer Science & Business Me-dia. Guckenheimer, J., Myers, M., & Sturmfels, B. (1997). Computing hopf bifurca-tions i. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 34 (1), 1–21. Hale, K. R., & Valdovinos, F. S. (2021). Ecological theory of mutualism: Robust patterns of stability and thresholds in two-species population models. 

Ecology and Evolution , 11 (24), 17651–17671. Holland, J. N. (2015). The population ecology of mutualism. Mutualism , 133– 158. Johnson, C. A., & Amarasekare, P. (2013). Competition for benefits can pro-mote the persistence of mutualistic interactions. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 328 , 54–64. Jones, E. I., Bronstein, J. L., & Ferri` ere, R. (2012). The fundamental role of competition in the ecology and evolution of mutualisms. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 1256 (1), 66–88. Kayal, E., Bentlage, B., Sabrina Pankey, M., Ohdera, A. H., Medina, M., Pla-chetzki, D. C., Collins, A. G., & Ryan, J. F. (2018). Phylogenomics provides a robust topology of the major cnidarian lineages and insights on the origins of key organismal traits. BMC evolutionary biology , 18 (1), 68. LaJeunesse, T. C., Parkinson, J. E., Gabrielson, P. W., Jeong, H. J., Reimer, J. D., Voolstra, C. R., & Santos, S. R. (2018). Systematic revision of symbiodiniaceae highlights the antiquity and diversity of coral endosym-bionts. Current biology , 28 (16), 2570–2580. Massing, J. C., & Gross, T. (2022). Generalized structural kinetic modeling: A survey and guide. Frontiers in Molecular Biosciences , Volume 9 - 2022 .https://doi.org/10.3389/fmolb.2022.825052 Massing, J. C., Gross, T., Yeakel, J. D., & Fahimipour, A. K. (2025). Generalized dynamics of cooperating bacteria. bioRxiv , 2025–05. May, R. M. (1976). Models for two interacting populations. Theoretical ecology: principles and applications , 49–70. Muller, E. B., Kooijman, S. A., Edmunds, P. J., Doyle, F. J., & Nisbet, R. M. (2009). Dynamic energy budgets in syntrophic symbiotic relationships between heterotrophic hosts and photoautotrophic symbionts. Journal of Theoretical Biology , 259 (1), 44–57. Pernice, M., Meibom, A., Van Den Heuvel, A., Kopp, C., Domart-Coulon, I., Hoegh-Guldberg, O., & Dove, S. (2012). A single-cell view of ammonium assimilation in coral–dinoflagellate symbiosis. The ISME journal , 6 (7), 1314–1324. R¨ adecker, N., Escrig, S., Spangenberg, J. E., Voolstra, C. R., & Meibom, A. (2023). Coupled carbon and nitrogen cycling regulates the cnidarian– algal symbiosis. Nature Communications , 14 (1), 6948. 24 R¨ adecker, N., Pogoreutz, C., Gegner, H. M., C´ ardenas, A., Roth, F., Bougoure, J., Guagliardo, P., Wild, C., Pernice, M., Raina, J.-B., et al. (2021). Heat stress destabilizes symbiotic nutrient cycling in corals. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 118 (5), e2022653118. R¨ adecker, N., Raina, J.-B., Pernice, M., Perna, G., Guagliardo, P., Kilburn, M. R., Aranda, M., & Voolstra, C. R. (2018). Using aiptasia as a model to study metabolic interactions in cnidarian-symbiodinium symbioses. 

Frontiers in Physiology , 9, 214. Sachs, J. L., & Simms, E. L. (2006). Pathways to mutualism breakdown. Trends in ecology & evolution , 21 (10), 585–592. Stiefs, D., Gross, T., Steuer, R., & Feudel, U. (2008). Computation and visual-ization of bifurcation surfaces. International Journal of Bifurcation and chaos , 18 (08), 2191–2206. Tanaka, Y., Suzuki, A., & Sakai, K. (2018). The stoichiometry of coral-dinoflagellate symbiosis: Carbon and nitrogen cycles are balanced in the recycling and double translocation system. The ISME journal , 12 (3), 860–868. Xiang, T., Lehnert, E., Jinkerson, R. E., Clowez, S., Kim, R. G., DeNofrio, J. C., Pringle, J. R., & Grossman, A. R. (2020). Symbiont population control by host-symbiont metabolic interaction in symbiodiniaceae-cnidarian associations. Nature communications , 11 (1), 108. Yeakel, J. D., Stiefs, D., Novak, M., & Gross, T. (2011). Generalized modeling of ecological population dynamics. Theoretical Ecology , 4, 179–194. Yellowlees, D., Rees, T. A. V., & Leggat, W. (2008). Metabolic interactions between algal symbionts and invertebrate hosts. Plant, cell & environ-ment , 31 (5), 679–694. 25